---
title: Monthly General Meeting, January 2026
author: She
excerpt: >
    Accepting direct donations, election platform choice,
    deferring privacy policy update to next meeting, removing VACATION
---

## Propositions and Motions

### Do we want to turn on direct Stripe-based donations?

This meeting discussed whether Libera Chat should be able to accept direct
donations through Stripe in addition to Liberapay. This has the advantage
of giving us more reliable income data, better support for one-time
donations, and a more streamlined path to donation for new donors.
This would require a minor privacy policy update
in order to allow us to retain donor information as required by Swedish law,
which would be retained by Stripe on our behalf.

This proposition passed unanimously.

### Election platform decision

As participation in asynchronous elections is now required for continued
membership in the Libera Chat organisation, this meeting was tasked with
resolving how best to resolve an issue with the election system Libera Chat
had used in previous years. The platform does not support disclosure of who
voted in a particular election without also disclosing the exact votes cast,
which was agreed to be undesirable. The meeting discussed either making a
separate "roll-call" poll with ballot disclosure, or exploring an alternative
voting platform that does not support ranked-choice ballots.

The meeting ultimately agreed that adding a roll-call poll to the previous
platform was the best way forward.

### Privacy policy amendment

This meeting proposed amending the privacy policy in order to contain explicit
wording regarding what data may be retained by our channel management bot
`litharge` in order to limit it scope.

The meeting decided that the proposed amendment was premature
as it doesn't cover data that may be retained by future channel management
bots and that it should be revisited next meeting.

## Other questions

### Should we remove the NickServ vacation module?

This meeting discussed removing the `NickServ` `VACATION` command
which has had relatively little legitimate use. `VACATION` triples nick
expiration times during the next logout. The meeting also considered
whether the expiration of primary nicks should be extended due to this command
being removed.

The meeting agreed that `VACATION` should be removed, and that users who
plan to be away from the network for more than a third of a year may contact
staff to arrange an extended expiry time if necessary.
The meeting agreed NOT to extend expiration times across the board, but did
agree that unexpired accounts which have `VACATION` set should still keep
the benefits of `VACATION` until their next login.
